If we then look at a U.P. level, we have a commissioner for tax opportunities or also make sense
to have a ministry in Germany that is, so to say, account the part to this.
So I think the time is now to come up with something like this, that's for sure.
But it's absolutely unclear how strong this ministry will be, what's the scope and
accept the person and this also something important, you need somebody who is not only
becoming the needed knowledge, but also with the engagement and power to come up with change.
Welcome to the Software Freedom Podcast, this podcast is presented to you by the Free Software
Foundation Europe.
We are a charity that empowers users to take control of technology.
I'm Bonnie Mehring, and today I'm here with Alexander Sander.
Alex, who has now been a regular guest on this podcast, is the Senior Policy Consultant
for the FSFE.
And in his work for the FSFE, he monitors the happenings in the European Union and also pushes
for the recognition of Free Software.
Together, we will cover the latest developments at Germany in regard to the policy and
the Coalition Treaty in Germany.
This treaty was formed by the Conservative parties, CDU and CSU, and the social democrats
called SPD in Germany.
Thank you, Alex, for being here.
Thank you so much for making the time and to walking us through the Coalition Treaty and also
the latest developments.
Thank you very much.
Yeah, thanks for having me.
So Alex, this treaty has now been out for around a week, as far as I remember.
What is your first take on this treaty?
I guess it might have some spill over effect on the European Union as well.
How do you think that this looks like?
Yeah, so I mean, we studied the treaty and there are definitely some things that most likely
will also have an impact on the European Union and its Germany as a large member state
of the European Union.
It's also important to learn what the Germans are about to do in the next four years.
And that's why this Coalition Treaty is not only important for Germany, but also for the
European Union.
In particular, then there are also some references to the European Union, how they want
to collaborate on the topic of Free Software.
And yeah, for example, coming up with a shared deck and stuff like this.
And yeah, let's dive into this and discuss a bit what we will see in the next four years
in Germany, but also in the European Union.
And yeah, what to expect this will be pretty interesting as the devil is Austin in the
detail.
I can imagine, and there are over 140 sides to this whole treaty.
But how many sides are specifically on digital policies and the new digital minister?
Well, I mean, it's for us it's not that important how many sides it's more on what
they say.
And here there are just a few sentences that shed light on the topic of Free Software.
And there are some also some other topics or words they use that also can contribute
to this topic.
And this is what we are going to analyze now.
I mean, also you mentioned that there will be a new ministry.
And that also sort of important, but also here, it depends on like what the scope of this
ministry, how strong will the ministry be, also in the context to other ministries.
And then ultimately, who is leading this ministry and how ambitious is this person towards
the goals that are not only in the treaty, but also in general, the knowledge and ambitions
of this person that are also something which should be recognized by analyzing and analyzing
this treaty.
That let's start with what's in it on Free Software, in the treaty, they talk about open
source.
And I mean, it's first of all, what's interesting is that they want to collaborate with
private and public actors in order to promote open source ecosystem, which is quite okay,
I'd say, and it's also a reasonable goal.
I mean, that's something we have seen in the past.
Not only in private actors, we also need public actors, we need public funding, for example,
we need procurement, all of these topics we already discussed in the podcast on funding,
but also on the procurement rules.
We have the campaign public money, public code, which is asking government basically to release
everything under Free Software Light and as soon as you invest public money in software.
So there are already some step forward in the last years that also the German government
understood that Free Software plays an important role to reach digital sovereignty to have
a resilient IT infrastructure to be independent and to come out, for example, out of
vandalizing.
So that's what also the upcoming government understood that also what is reflected in the
treaty, in the coalition treaty, however, if we then look at what they want to do
precisely, then it's getting a bit vague.
So for example, they say that they want to define ambitious goals on the topic of open source,
which means that they didn't define it yet.
So the only thing that they agreed on is that they want to be ambitious and that this needs
to be defined.
So we can already see that they are like upcoming work for us.
I can't imagine.
So this is something that is in the whole treaty, as far as I have here and rat in all of the
upper resources, that this is something which is a lot in this coalition treaty that there
are not specific goals or specific details, but that's more of a let's talk about this later
attitude and we will just kind of like do this.
How do you see this in regard to Free Software?
Do you think that Free Software has a strong stand in the treaty or will be undermined?
That's actually in regard to open washing as well.
Yeah, I mean, in general, that's why it's such a long treaty, I think.
So since they didn't manage it to precisely agree on things, they had to describe things a lot.
So that's why I also think there's upcoming work for us.
I mean, the good thing is that they say they want to be ambitious.
So that's something that we can also follow up and where we can or where we need to follow up and see
what this means in practice.
Also, they give already some insights for example that they say they want to work with the sender
of digital sovereignty, for example, or the surrender agency, they also want to collaborate
a U.P. and why they also want to come up with a so-called German stack which should be
somehow collaborate and be embedded in the U-Stack initiative in Europe.
So we can also already see that they have important actors on the radar and that they also
see that they need to collaborate. So that's something which is very, very good and very, very useful
and also needed. So in this regard, I'd say they found the right spot where they need to work
on what is missing is concrete goals. So for example, we want to see that 20% of the budget
is to be invested in Free Software, for example, or that we want to remove and 30% of our
window looking for something like this. So this is what's missing. The only reference we have
is that it needs to be ambitious. So if you look at this word, I think it's fair to say
we should compare it to what we're done in the past. So this means it needs to be better than the
last government. So else it wouldn't be ambitious, right? So it's not about keeping the status quo,
but they say want to be ambitious, it needs to be better than before. So I think that's somehow
the threshold what we are looking for and so this is at least the bare minimum what we can expect
or what we should expect from the next government and this is then also I do believe something for
as soon as we have the new government where we need to follow up is then to make sure that the goals
that are defined are becoming one of the priorities of the next government. So as you also said
if you look at the coalition treaty in general, it's not only in the topic of Free Software
but in many other topics as well that they are remaining very vague and that they are not very
clear on their priorities. So it's absolutely unclear if they want to be ambitious in the beginning
of their legislative firm or in the end for example. So and this is on us as the whole Free Software
community to make sure that this topic is becoming a priority and if you look at the other
member states in the European Union and the European Union itself it also makes sense to bring
pressure to it since the others are also working on this and it doesn't make sense to be the last one
in the party but to join the party early and in particular for Germany it makes sense since they
already came up with solution like open desk and open code with the center of digital sovereignty
in the past to continue this path and to at the needed resources for this to go there and this is
another very important thing it's about budget. So also they talk about budget for these activities
and here they say they want to provide the needed resources but they don't say anything on how much
and when. So and this is also a huge problem also here in general for the whole coalition treaty
and they didn't talk about money they just say we want to do this we want to do this we want to do this
if there is the money for this so and this makes it absolutely complicated since it's also not
clear again where they put their priorities to and also it's not clear where the money should come
for so it could be easy for them to say for like every topic they have in the coalition treaty
yes always sorry we don't have the money and this is again on other countries they put in this
very important sentence that I would also like to highlight because this is like this is
saying that will define the whole work of this coalition is to sentence if we have the money for it
and I find this very fascinating because this puts a lot of power to define an actual ministry
you're not only to the financial ministry but it's pretty clear that there will be huge discussions
between the ministry itself right so it's not then that the ministry of finance just distributed
to the money as he likes but there will be also discussions between the ministry the ministry of
economics the fight the ministry of environment for simply for resources and this also means that
there is a completely new ministry as you at in the beginning right this ministry of digital things
let's say it like this so it's also not I have you don't know the name exactly yeah
it's a country yeah so let's say the digital ministry so we don't know the name we don't know who is
going to run it and even worse we don't know the scope of this ministry so and it's also pretty
unclear how much power it will have how important it will be and how strong they can fight or defend
topics they work on so this is all very unclear at the moment and this is also where we
have huge debate or whether it's the huge debate and I mean you can pretty much compare with the
this German Bundestag so there two terms ago they introduced the committee for digital affairs
so where they want to discuss digital topics in a specific committee but this was not a leading
committee but just like a consulting committee so it didn't have the needed power to really
have a stance on digital topics so they have been absolute expert in this committee and they
talked about the right things I think however they didn't have the power to make that much change
also there was a missing ministry on the other hand this is now added I think that's a good thing
so that we have basically in the parliament a committee and we are also on the other hand have a
ministry also again if we then look at the U.P. level we have a commissioner for tax opportunities
or also make sense to have a ministry in Germany that is so to say account the part to this so I
think the time is now to come up with something like this that's for sure but it's absolutely unclear
how strong this ministry will be what the scope and accept the person and this also something important
you need somebody who is not only coming with the needed knowledge but also with the engagement
and power to come up with change and so therefore it's difficult to say at the minute where all of
this will end and land at one point and as you said on the other hand we have this issue of
finding things all of this and so it's the worst case is that we end up with these nice words but
then they say we are sorry there is no money but on the other hand I do believe that there's also
a huge pressure coming from other member states and the U.P. union also like from external partners
we see how important it is to have independent infrastructure we can rely on and the only
answer to this is setting up such infrastructure which is software and I also do believe that more
and more decision makers understand the need for software and I mean that this is basically the only
solution since they also and this is interesting they talk about open standards for example
and that they want to define them so and also they use words like indoor mobility,
U.P. in collaboration around software also we have some things on education that we talk about
resilience, digital sovereignty and all these words has been also used heavily in debate about
the attacks of our energy about like how we can independent from in particular external partners
that are not coming from the U.P. union and how we can make sure that there is so to say proper
U.P. in IT market so and if you look at all this description they come up so how this market
should look like and and how for example public administrations should use IT then you can only
come up with the is the saying that this is only possible with software or so you can't have an
interoperable U.P. in administrations so to say without Free Software so since you always want
into close standards you run into vendor not in if you don't use Free Software so if you
as you are as we have seen in the past using this proper territory solution so then you are stuck
and you can't collaborate you can't be interoperable and for this so even if they don't
precisely talk about Free Software open source they want to collaborate they want to be
interoperable and this I say is only possible with Free Software and this is then also something
where we as Free Software community need to step in and make sure that this is reflected once they
start working on this so they give us also some ideas some things where they want to
for example collaborate on U.P. in level on this on this stack so there are some some ideas
some are called one stack a U.S. stack then we have national stacks so in the coalition treaty
they talk about a German stack but they also recognize that it's absolutely meaningless to do this
in silos but to collaborate on this and this collaboration so to come up with a U.P. in stack
where member states and different actors, private and public actors contribute to such a stack
this could only be done with the software since the four freedoms to use study share and improve
allow this collaboration any other property thing wouldn't allow this wouldn't allow
interoperability and therefore the path could only be Free Software solution to work with and it's on
the other hand important for us to to discuss this things we also see other discussions happening
on the U.P. in the moment that are coming with slogans like by European or things like this
which is also a something in particular if you look at the software market or not over there
the Free Software market there is nothing like a national IT right so our IT is global
it was global it will remain global so else we can't run our infrastructure without open standards
we wouldn't have the internet for example and this is then also true for every other system so we
need to have open standards and for interoperability and collaboration we need a global approach
however if you look at the market you will also see that in in particular if you invest in
Free Software you will often end up with SMEs and if you procure in Europe Free Software you will
also most likely end up with European SMEs so you don't need this slogan by European if you say
we want to invest in Free Software and that's something where I fear that decision makers
haven't understood this correctly at the moment but this is then something we need to work on
and the term in the next term in the next four years on the national level but also on a European level
to make clear that if you want to have like a European stack where the European commission
together with the member states collaborate on such a solution that this is only possible with
software and if you do this you will also most likely end up with a lot of European SMEs which
just then also good for the European market but also we have spill over effect in the topics
the coalition treaty also talks about namely skills resilient consumers since they then will get
also the tools which are developed for public administration and can reuse them for example
in the civil society organizations but also this is what I highlighted in a Bundestag theory in December
think about fire fighters think about hospitals they also need infrastructure and we should also
give them resilient infrastructure and not a proprietary software coming from non-European countries
absolutely absolutely so to put a phrase on this all there are a lot of possibilities basically
for Free Software industry but none of it is yet sure and it's definitely a task for the
digital civil society to take a careful eye on this to watch this and to see what actually
happening and to also push for Free Software. Absolutely we can feed the coalition treaty as a
starting point to fight for goals like public money public code to fight for funding and
publicly discuss in a recent podcast together but also to make sure that educational resources or
that education in general has an eye on Free Software and that all of these words like
interoperability and so on and so forth are filled with Free Software so these are the tasks so
even if they are just a few mentions of the term open source in the coalition treaty there are
still many other points where if you read it correctly you the answer could only be Free Software
and this is what we need to make sure that decision makers understand if you want to have
digital sovereignty you can only do this with Free Software as exchange to the
nature of the free ones and that will be the most challenging task in the next four years and then
I've metly putting money to this. Yes this of course I also have another question now
not I found really interesting the recently had as symposium for public money public code
and a lot of people were invited to this and a lot of people showed up what is your feeling
currently is the understanding of Free Software and especially to need to invest public money
in public code what's your feeling there how is this moving ahead and how is it going and what
are the latest happenings here yeah so with this event public money public code in practice we
brought together mainly local administrations regional administrations with players from national
level and civil society to discuss how we can collaborate and how we can learn from collaboration
of others how we can network what is already out there where we can build on and I think this is
all to something which we can reuse for the next four years so as the coalition to it it talks
about public and private collaboration I also do believe that we should have the layer of civil
society to this and research since there is already also a lot of experience on how to collaborate
on and yeah using a strategies and ideas as proof print and this is something we need to make
way more use out of it so the benefit of using Free Software is that we don't have to reinvent the
wheel and this is not only true for the code itself but also for processes and how we get there
so in this is something where we I think waste a lot of resources since public administrations from
time to time try to yeah or are used to work in silos and they have to adapt their workflows,
their style of working towards a way more collaborative attitude and this is something where we
can learn from others so and this is also nice that the coalition treaty talks about this collaboration
so that they want to collaborate with other member states with other public administrations and
here I think this was shown in this symposium that there is already a lot out there which we can
reuse where we can build on and this is something which we can bring into the debate and show
pace so how well all of this is already established in some areas and for us it's important
that we shed light on these actors that has been always disrespectful and that we learn from them
and I do believe that this symposium brought together these people and shed some light on this
and this is something what we learned we need more and not only in Germany but also in
other member states and we need to make sure that these people interact and I think that will be
also key for the next five or four years depending on the Europe Germany is to make sure that
the actors that want to get active collaborate talk to each other and learn from each other
and in this regard these events help and this is also something where I do believe that
some money should go so if we talk about resources we do not only talk about technical
solution in the end we should always also look at the community around and this community I
do not necessarily mean the community we talk about but also the community's other talks about so
if you look for example at the center of digital reality their community is mainly companies
why so they need to bring together different companies that had to develop this open desk solution
if you look at Munich for example they collaborate with consul which is a tool which allows
participation for citizens and here they came up with a sponsorship since this is a foundation
and since you can't easily procure from them and this is also something we learn so
other than classical procurement procedures we need also to go other ways to work together with
the different communities and to come up with good solutions and it's not like that we if you
I don't know go on a market for chairs or something like this you just go there by the best chair
and then pull stop right so and you have right basically one vendor you talk to and then this is good
but if you talk about Free Software you can't just go to a market and procure something
sometimes you have to come up with other solutions you have to think about sponsorship you have to
think about giving the nation or just like a small amount of money into communities
to make something happen so and this needs a rethinking and for this rethinking we should learn
from strategies of others who already had good experience with this and where we don't have to
reinvent the wheel so to say not in the IT itself but in how we collaborate with the Free Software
ecosystem and this is something where the symposium shed a lot of light on and where we basically
where there was also a lot of agreement that you need to go other paths of collaboration
yeah that we know from the past for the fact all right that sounds very interesting and like
something we should have visited yeah so but we try to do more of these kind of events and also
I mean we have around public money public code it's easy to to get around and to like learn what
we are doing in this area and to collaborate with us so yeah join us in these kind of events
contribute to this and also do believe that this is something more or less everyone can do so
if you talk about Free Software it's not that much anymore that you need to explain people
the concept of Free Software but whether or not like that there is way more than code and
I mean we also have seen this with the corona tracing at the very site so
ultimately it was not that much about the code it was about the different communities that came
together to come up with a ultimately technical solution yeah but it was not only technically
people coming together and this is something what we can learn and more for that one absolutely so
and this is basically where we are today and what we need to explain so if you talk about
European interoperability we should not talk about technical communities coming together
but communities that are needed to come up with a good solution no in regard to who was there
at this symposium I would love to talk a bit more about Sanders because Sanders is also mentioned
in the coalition treaty and there has been the first personal decision made there can you
shed some light on yeah so this is basically the first very sad story also this is also
a bit strange so to say so during this event we we had the CEO of the Center of the Children's
Organities of the 10th and 30th of a limited in German and Jutta Horstmann she also gave a very good
keynote and she also was on the panel with us discussing all of these questions I was just
referring to and now she was removed from this position just the very next day after our symposium
so we do believe that there is no direct connection to what she was saying there
I do have some but I mean in general we yeah just learn about this the very next day after
she was at our event that yeah she was removed from this position or to there is not anyone
new to be assigned to this position and also it was a bit unclear why she was removed so there
has been statements from the Ministry of Interior who basically sent the CEO to this
Center of the Children's Organities and they were just saying like since we need to re-structure
we need to remove her which as we then go back to the beginning of this podcast doesn't make too
much sense since he still don't know the scope of everything right so and I doubt that the
Ministry of Interior is the one who comes up with the cabinet and will learn about how all of these
structure will look like so it rather looks like that they yeah use this moment to all by the
remove people that are not fully in line with what they are planning to do and this definitely
fears us so I think Jutta has done a very good job the University of the Children's Organities
she was also in the hearing in the German Bundestag explaining all the challenges that the
Center is facing at the moment however what we learn is that the new to the new formed Ministry
of the Children's whatever and so it's going to the Conservatives so the city will and since Jutta was
also a Queen Party member it might be that it was rather a political decision but what's happening
here then one based on what she has done and what she was planning to do so and in this regard we
definitely fear that Jutta will be replaced by someone who's not that much of an expert so we didn't
learn from from today on who will be the new person or the new CEO for for tennis and this
also looks a bit to me that it was a rather a very quick decision that was taken then a very
reflected decision and in particular as a such an important topic we also need stable decisions
we need a continuation of things rather than people politics and power politics so and here it will
be definitely interesting to see if this change of the of the CEO position will also then
automatically come with changes in structures so until now we didn't learn anything about it
and also who's who's the next CEO of tennis and what will be the priorities of this person
so and for us it's important that we continue the good path that the tennis continues the
good collaboration they already started this European partner I think that something that they
just recently kicked off so that they are not working in the silo but that they collaborate not only
with in Germany with several public administrations on several levels what they are already
doing but that they also collaborate this European partner I think that's very important
and here we need to make sure that they don't lose ground and that they don't lose power
that they get the needed resources and also that they still do this good Free Software work
and that they don't start open motion so because this is also something we fear so if you go
through the coalition treaty and if you see a set is by European initiatives
the auto fear that there will be a lot of open motion around this and this is also why we need to
be still active in our watchdog roads this is a short break for our own cause thank you for
listening to the software feed-in podcast working for software feed-in and producing podcasts
cost money please consider supporting us with a donation on the fsfe.org/donate
and then the show knows and this is also why we need to be still active in our watchdog roads
we have seen this with data port phoenix back in the days in Germany so the very first attempt to
come up with a so-called open source solution for public administrations we have eaten
checked for the licenses and figured out that this is not really open source what they are doing
but rather open motion so we hope we don't have to do this for for other solutions that the
German government so to say is coming up for so but that we make sure that this is really
Free Software what they are coming up with and that they continue the good past they just started
and that these ambitious goals that it needs to be set up are really ambitious and not watered
down in any way or that they end up with doing power politics and discussing people instead of
topics so this is something we need to make sure in this regard so this very first decision
basically so to remove yourself from this position was what's very strange to say
yeah absolutely I absolutely can understand especially in light that as you already mentioned
we do not really know what will be happening and we will only find us out doing the
coalition of those three parties and doing the formation of the German government so
it's really curious to see what what are the next steps what is the scope that will be there
for the digital ministry and also how Free Software will stand be as Free Software
foundation Europe and especially you will probably pay a lot of attention there is this correct
can we say this to our listeners that you will be there and you will watch that
yes absolutely also I will do this together with my colleague Johannes who is also very
actively working in Germany on all of these topics so and we also organized this symposium in
in essence Germany on the public money public code topic again and he also follows a lot
the topic of open washing he also already gave a lot of talks on this so he is also an absolute expert
on this so and in this regard also that this is a continuous call to our community if you see
these cases of open washing or if you see any cases where you say well this is against the
goals of the software foundation Europe or the Free Software ecosystem let us know right
of the email to contact us if it is or reach out for us directly on social networks or when
we are on conferences so help us to shed light on on these topics so because this also helps us
explaining and the issues to decision makers and making sure that they come up with these ambitious
goals that are really contributing to a Free Software ecosystem and not something which is
like basically open wash Alex thank you so much for your work thank you so much for your time here
in the podcast and explaining the truth to us walking us through there this was really enlightening
thank you very much thank you also thank you to our listeners for listening to this software
freedom podcast episode this was the software freedom podcast if you like this episode please
recommend it to your friends and write it stay tuned for more inspiring conversations that
explore the importance of software freedom and its impact on our digital life this podcast is
presented to you by the Free Software foundation Europe we are a charity that works on promoting
software freedom if you like our work please consider supporting us with the nation
we depend on your support you find more information under fsfe.org/donate thank you so
much bye bye